.TH RAR 1 22.04.2002 "" "RAR archiver"
.SH NAME
rar - archive files with compression
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rar
.I "<command> [-<switch 1> -<switch N>] archive [files...]"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This manual page documents briefly the
.BR rar
archiver.
.br
This manual page was written for the Debian GNU/Linux distribution
because the original program does not have a manual page.
.br
Commands and options described here are as of
.BR rar
3.0b5.
.PP
.B rar
and
.B unrar
are programs for manipulation with .rar archives.
.SH OPTIONS
After the program name comes a command and then optional switches with
dashes before them.
.br
A summary of commands is included below.
For a complete description, run
.BR rar
without options.
.TP
.B a
Add files to archive.
.TP
.B c
Add archive comment. Comment length is limited to 62000 bytes.
.TP
.B cf
Add files comment. File comments are displayed when the 'v'
command is given. File comment length is limited to 32767 bytes.
.TP
.B cw
Write archive comment to a specified file.
.TP
.B d
Delete files from archive.
.TP
.B e
Extract files to current directory. Does not create any subdirectories.
.TP
.B f
Freshen files in archive. Updates those files changed since they
were packed to the archive. This command will not add new to the archive.
.TP
.B k
Lock archive. Any command which intend to change the archive
will be ignored.
.TP
.B l[t]
List content of archive [technical]. Files are listed as
the 'v' command with the exception of the file path. i.e.
the file name is displayed. Optional technical information
displayed when 't' modifier is used.
.TP
.B m[f]
Move to archive [files only]. Directories will
not be removed if 'f' modifier is used and/or '\-ed' switch is
applied.
.TP
.B p
Print file to stdout.
.TP
.B r
Repair archive. For further details look in
.BR rar.txt .
.TP
.B rc
Reconstruct missing volumes using recovery volumes (.rev files).
You need to specify any existing volume as the archive name, for
example, 'rar rc backup.part03.rar'.
.TP
.B rr[N]
Add data recovery record. Optionally, redundant information
(recovery record) may be added to an archive.
.TP
.B rv[N]
Create recovery volumes (.rev files), which can be later used to reconstruct
missing files in a volume set.  This command has sense only for multivolume archives.
For further details look in
.BR rar.txt .
.TP
.B s[name|-]
Convert archive to or from SFX. The archive is merged with SFX-module
in the user's home directory.
.TP
.B t
Test archive files.
.TP
.B u
Update files in archive. Adds files not already in the archive
and updates files changed since they were packed to the archive.
.TP
.B v[t]
Verbosely list archive [technical]
.TP
.B x
Extract files with full path.
.SH SWITCHES
.BR NOTE:
Every switch must be separated by a whitespace. They cannot be put
together.
.TP
.B \-?
Display help on commands and switches. The same as when none
or an illegal command line option is entered.
.TP
.B \-\-
This switch tells to RAR that there is no more switches
in the command line. It could be useful, if either archive
or file name starts from '\-' character. Without '\-\-' switch
such name would be treated as switch.
.TP
.B \-ac
Clear Archive attribute after compression or extraction
(Windows version only).
.TP
.B \-ag[format]
Generate archive name using the current date and time.
Appends the current date string to an archive name when
creating an archive. Useful for daily backups.
For further details look in
.BR rar.txt .
.TP
.B \-ao
Add files with Archive attribute set
(Windows version only).
.TP
.B \-ap
Set path inside archive. This path is merged to file names when adding files
to an archive and removed from file names when extracting.
.TP
.B \-as
Synchronize archive contents. If this switch is used when archiving, those archived files
which are not present in the list of the currently added
files, will be deleted from archive. It is convenient to use
this switch in combination with \-u (update) to synchronize
contents of an archive and an archiving directory.
.TP
.B \-av
Put authenticity verification (registered versions only). Details in
.BR register.txt .
.TP
.B \-av\-
Disable AV checking or adding.
.TP
.B \-cfg\-
Disable read configuration and environment.
.TP
.B \-cl
Convert file names to lower case.
.TP
.B \-cu
Convert file names to upper case.
.TP
.B \-c\-
Disable comments show.
.TP
.B \-df
Delete files after archiving. This switch in combination with
the command "A" performs the same action as the command "M".
.TP
.B \-dh
Open shared files. Allows to process files opened by other applications
for writing.
.TP
.B \-ds
Do not sort files while adding to a solid archive.
.TP
.B \-ed
Do not add empty directories.
.TP
.B \-ee
Do not process extended attributes. Only for OS/2 versions.
.TP
.B \-en
Do not add "end of archive" block.

This switch cannot be used with volumes, because the end
of archive block contains information important for correct
volume processing.
.TP
.B \-ep
Exclude paths from names.
.TP
.B \-ep1
Exclude base dir from names.
.TP
.B \-ep2
Expand paths to full. Store full file paths (except a drive
letter and leading path separator) when archiving.
.TP
.B \-e<attr>
Specifies file exclude attributes mask.
.TP
.B \-f
Freshen files. May be used with archive extraction or creation.
.TP
.B \-hp<password>
Encrypt both file data and headers.
The password is case-sensitive. If you omit the password on the
command line, you will be prompted with message "Enter password".
.TP
.B \-idp
Disable percentage indicator.
.TP
.B \-ieml[.][addr]
Send archive by email. Win32 version only.
.TP
.B \-ierr
Send all messages to stderr.
.TP
.B \-ilog
Log errors to file (registered versions only).
.TP
.B \-inul
Disable all messages.
.TP
.B \-isnd
Enable sound.
.TP
.B \-k
Lock archive. Any command which intends to change the archive
will be ignored.
.TP
.B \-kb
Keep broken extracted files.
.TP
.B \-m<0..5>
Set compression level (0-store...3-default...5-best). By default
.BR rar
uses \-m3 method (Normal compression).
.TP
.B \-mc<par>
Set advanced compression parameters.
For further details look in
.BR rar.txt .
.TP
.B \-md<size>
Set dictionary size in Kb (64,128,256,512,1024,2048,4097 or a,b,c,d,e,f,g)
.TP
.B \-ms[list]
Specify file types to store.
.TP
.B \-o+
Overwrite existing files.
.TP
.B \-o\-
Do not overwrite existing files.
.TP
.B \-ol
Save symbolic links as the link instead of the file.
.TP
.B \-os
Save NTFS streams. Win32 version only.
.TP
.B \-ow
Save file owner and group.
.TP
.B \-p<password>
Encrypt files with the string <password> as password while archiving.
The password is case-sensitive. If you omit the password on the
command line, you will be prompted with message "Enter password".
.TP
.B \-p\-
Do not query password.
.TP
.B \-r
Recurse subdirectories.
.TP
.B \-r0
Similar to \-r, but when used with the commands 'a', 'u', 'f', 'm'
will recurse subdirectories only for wildcard names.
.TP
.B \-ri<p>[:<s>]
Set priority and sleep time. Available only in RAR for Windows.
.TP
.B \-rr[N]
Add data recovery record.
.TP
.B \-rv[N]
Create recovery volumes.
.B \-s
Create solid archive.
.TP
.B \-s<N>
Create solid groups using file count. Similar to \-s, but reset solid
statistics after compressing <N> files.
.TP
.B \-se
Create solid groups using extension. Similar to \-s, but reset solid
statistics if file extension is changed.
.TP
.B \-sv
Create independent solid volumes. Similar to \-s, but reset solid statistics
as soon as possible when starting a new volume.
.TP
.B \-sv\-
Create dependent solid volumes. Similar to \-s, but reset of solid statistics
is disabled.
.TP
.B \-s\-
Disable solid archiving.
.TP
.B \-sfx[name]
Create SFX archives. The archive is merged with
SFX-module in the user's home directory.
.TP
.B \-t
Test files after archiving. This switch is especially
useful in combination with the move command, so files will be
deleted only if archive had been successfully tested.
.TP
.B \-tk
Keep original archive time. Prevents
.BR rar
from modifying the archive date when changing an archive.
.TP
.B \-tl
Set archive time to latest file. Forces
.BR rar
to set the date of a changed archive to the date of the newest file in the archive.
.TP
.B \-u
Update files.
.TP
.B \-v<size>[k|b|f]
Create volumes with size=<size>*1000 [*1024, *1].
.TP
.B -vd
Erase disk contents before creating volume.All files and directories
on the target disk will be erased when '\-vd' is used.  The switch applies
only to removable media, the hard disk cannot be erased using this switch.
.TP
.B \-w<path>
Assign work directory.
.TP
.B \-x<file>
Exclude specified file. Wildcards may be used and you may
specify the switch '\-x' several times.
.TP
.B \-x@<list>
Exclude files in specified list file.
.TP
.B \-x@
Read file names to exclude from stdin.
.TP
.B \-y
Assume Yes on all queries.
.TP
.B \-z<file>
Read archive comment from file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The program is documented fully in
.IR rar.txt
which you find in /usr/share/doc/rar.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Petr Cech <cech@debian.org> according
to "rar \-h" for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
